Herausgeber et al. (Hrsg.): Software Engineering und Software Management 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 1

Requirements Engineering Challenges in Large-Scale Agile
System Development

Rashidah Kasauli,1 Grischa Liebel, Eric Knauss, Swathi Gopakumar, Benjamin Kanagwa2
Keywords: requirements engineering; large-scale agile; system engineering

Despite wide critic, agile approaches have significantly contributed to the way software is
developed [Me14]and success stories have led to their application at large scale [DPL16]
and in system development [BE15, PMG12], an environment characterized by long lead
times [BE15] and stable, sequential engineering practices [PMG12]. In this environment,
new challenges arise, especially with respect to managing requirements [SKV10].
Requirements engineering
- Define tests
- Inform developers
- Document for maintenance

V

Time for invention
and planning

Impact on
infrastructure
Agile Islands
in Waterfall

Component vs.
System Thinking

Scope of agile development

Safety critical
& agile

Role of RE
- Reqts: Order, Goal, or Dialogue?
- Embrace Change of Reqts?
- Reqts as Technical Doc.?

To be supported by:
Shared Understanding of Value
a) Customer Value to Team
b) Meaningful User Stories
c) Feedback and Clarification
Communication and Knowledge
Management
Build and Maintain System
Understanding
a) Inform and Synchronize
b) Create and Maintain Traces
c) Bridge Plan-Driven and Agile
d) Complement Tests & Stories
e) Agile Tool Chain

Fig. 1: Map of challenges with respect to scope of agile work in system development

We address the lack of empirical studies and report RE related challenges of large-scale agile
system development. Through a multiple case study of four large-scale system development
cases, based on 5 focus groups, 2 cross-company workshops and 20 semi-structured
interviews, we present a catalogue of real-world RE challenges related to applying agile
development in large-scale systems (Fig. 1). These challenges are effectively hindering a
faster and more sustainable development of software. In order to yield their full benefits,
agile practices and a holistic system requirements model must be better aligned (Tab. 1). Key
challenges occur when there is an interaction, or a lack thereof, between system engineering
domains and we believe that industry would benefit from new impulses from research in the
area of Requirements Engineering for Large-Scale Agile System Development.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Software Center (www.software-center.se)
and the SIDA BRIGHT project and was published previously [Ka17].
1 Rashidah,

Grischa, Eric and Swathi are with Chalmers | University of Gothenburg, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Sweden. rashida@chalmers.se, grischa@chalmers.se, knauss@chalmers.se
2 Rashidah and Benjamin are with Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda. bkanagwa@cis.mak.ac.ug

c be

2 Rashidah Kasauli, Grischa Liebel, Eric Knauss, Swathi Gopakumar, Benjamin Kanagwa
Tab. 1: Conclusions of our research
1) Communication and
knowledge management.

2) Two areas of
requirements knowledge:
User Value and System
Understanding.
3) The interplay of
stakeholders from three
domains: customer,
development, and
integration & testing.

While related work implies that communication challenges are less prominent
in agile RE [In15, BWR11], our challenges relate to communication and
knowledge management. Both aspects are at the core of Agile and RE,
indicating a need for research in these areas specifically for system development.
This is in line with traditional practices of user and system requirements, but not
present in agile literature. Companies differ between doing RE in an agile way
and doing RE to support agility. Our findings suggest that such support cannot
be offered sufficiently by traditional, upfront RE, as indicated [Me14, He17].
Development embraces agility and dislikes traditional requirements and bulk
updates, which requires better synchronization between teams and establishing
of an agile tool-chain. Customer domain is concerned with breaking down
customer-visible features in order to communicate customer-value to team,
requiring support for writing meaningful user stories and for bridging the gap
between plan-driven and agile development. Integration and testing domain is
struggling to create and maintain traces and with the fact that user stories and
tests are not sufficient to build and maintain sufficient system understanding.

References
[BE15]

Berger, Christian; Eklund, Ulrik: Expectations and Challenges from Scaling Agile in
Mechatronics-Driven Companies – A Comparative Case Study. In: XP ’15. 2015.

[BWR11] Bjarnason, E.; Wnuk, K.; Regnell, B.: A case study on benefits and side-effects of agile
practices in large-scale requirements engineering. In: 1st Agile Reqts. Eng. WS. 2011.
[DPL16] Dikert, Kim; Paasivaara, Maria; Lassenius, Casper: Challenges and Success Factors for
Large-Scale Agile Transformations: A Systematic Literature Review. JSS, 2016.
[He17]

Heikkilä, Ville T; Paasivaara, Maria; Lasssenius, Casper; Damian, Daniela; Engblom,
Christian: Managing the requirements flow from strategy to release in large-scale agile
development: a case study at Ericsson. Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 1–45, 2017.

[In15]

Inayat, Irum; Salim, Siti Salwah; Marczak, Sabrina; Daneva, Maya; Shamshirband,
Shahaboddin: A systematic literature review on agile requirements engineering practices
and challenges. Computers in human behavior, 51:915–929, 2015.

[Ka17]

Kasauli, Rashidah; Liebel, Grischa; Knauss, Eric; Gopakumar, Swathi; Kanagwa, Benjamin:
Requirements Engineering Challenges in Large-Scale Agile System Development. In: RE
’17. Lisbon, Portugal, 2017.

[Me14]

Meyer, Bertrand: Agile! The Good, the Hype and the Ugly. Springer, 2014.

[PMG12] Pernstål, J.; Magazinius, A.; Gorschek, T.: A study investigating challenges in the interface
between product development and manufacturing in the development of software-intensive
automotive systems. SEKE, 22(07):965–1004, 2012.
[SKV10] Savolainen, J.; Kuusela, J.; Vilavaara, A.: Transition to agile development: rediscovery of
important requirements engineering practices. In: RE ’10. pp. 289–294, 2010.

