Herausgeber et al. (Hrsg.): Software Engineering und Software Management 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 1

LoCo CoCo: Automatically Constructing Coordination and
Communication Networks from Model-Based Systems
Engineering Data

Mazen Mohamad,1 Grischa Liebel,2 Eric Knauss2
Keywords: Systems Engineering; Communication; Coordination; Requirements Clarification;
Empirical Software Engineering

1

Extended Abstract

Communication and coordination are essential activities in software and systems engineering [KS95]. In particular, communicating requirements [He07], and sharing the
product and contextual knowledge required to understand requirements during analysis and
development [Li16] are challenging.
The structure of all interacting individuals and groups in an organisation can be described
and analysed as a social network. Social network analysis (SNA) and has successfully been
used in software engineering to facilitate collaboration and relationships among individuals
in software teams [Wo09].
Existing automated approaches for SNA, such as Codebook [BKZ10], focus on software
development artefacts on a low level of abstraction, such as source code or bug requests.
However, in large systems engineering projects, communication between different disciplines
is required [Li16], taking place on a domain level independent of the source code.
We present LoCo CoCo, the Low-Cost Communication and Coordination approach, the
result of a one-year design science research project at a large automotive original equipment
manufacturer (OEM). LoCo CoCo automatically creates social networks from model-based
systems engineering data by leveraging a structural meta model similar to standards like
EAST-ADL [EA].
We identify people and their relations by extracting ownership and trace information from
systems engineering data. The resulting networks are used as a supporting tool for enabling
or improving communication and coordination. We evaluated LoCo CoCo analytically,
by constructing social networks from real-life systems engineering data at the industrial
1 Chalmers

University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden mazenmhd@gmail.com
| University of Gothenburg, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Gothenburg, Sweden.
grischa@chalmers.se, knauss@chalmers.se

2 Chalmers

cbe

2 Mazen Mohamad, Grischa Liebel, Eric Knauss

partner. Additionally, we collected empirical data from 15 interviews and 12 surveys with
practitioners.
Our results indicate that LoCo CoCo helps addressing existing communication challenges by
identifying important contacts across the organisation structure, thus facilitating communication of requirements in systems engineering. While we observed that the quality of social
data in existing systems engineering tools, such as ownership data or information about
who changed elements, is sometimes low, practitioners rated it as sufficient. Furthermore,
visualising erroneous connections due to outdated social data can trigger practitioners to
update the data. Finally, we elicited several ethical implications arising from the use of
social data. These will have to be considered when using LoCo CoCo or similar approaches
in industry.

Acknowledgments
We thank the case company and all participants in the original study for their great support
and deep discussions. This work originates from a study conducted as a Master Thesis and
was published previously at Information and Software Technology Journal [MLK17].

References
[BKZ10] Begel, Andrew; Khoo, Yit Phang; Zimmermann, Thomas: Codebook: Discovering and
Exploiting Relationships in Software Repositories. In: Proceedings of the 32Nd ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1. pp. 125–134, 2010.
[EA]

EAST-ADL
Association:
,
EAST-ADL
V2.1.12.
http://www.eastadl.info/Specification/V2.1.12/html/index.html. last accessed Jun. 2015.

[He07]

Herbsleb, J. D.: Global Software Engineering: The Future of Socio-technical Coordination.
In: Future of Software Engineering, 2007. FOSE ’07. pp. 188–198, 2007.

[KS95]

Kraut, Robert E.; Streeter, Lynn A.: Coordination in Software Development. Commun.
ACM, 38(3):69–81, 1995.

[Li16]

Liebel, Grischa; Tichy, Matthias; Knauss, Eric; Ljungkrantz, Oscar; Stieglbauer, Gerald:
Organisation and communication problems in automotive requirements engineering.
Requirements Engineering, pp. 1–23, 2016.

[MLK17] Mohamad, Mazen; Liebel, Grischa; Knauss, Eric: LoCo CoCo: Automatically constructing
coordination and communication networks from model-based systems engineering data.
Information and Software Technology, 92(Supplement C):179–193, 2017.
[Wo09]

Wolf, T.; Schröter, A.; Damian, D.; Panjer, L.D.; Nguyen, T. H.: Mining Task-Based Social
Networks to Explore Collaboration in Software Teams. IEEE Software, 26(1):58–66, jan
2009.

