(Hrsg.): ,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2017 1

Modeling and Verification of Evolving Cyber-Physical
Spaces

Christos Tsigkanos1, Timo Kehrer2, Carlo Ghezzi3
Abstract:
In this work, we report about recent research results on the Modeling and Verification of Evolving
Cyber-Physical Spaces, published in [1]. We increasingly live in cyber-physical spaces – spaces that are
both physical and digital, and where the two aspects are intertwined. Such spaces are highly dynamic
and typically undergo continuous change. Software engineering can have a profound impact in this
domain, by defining suitable modeling and specification notations as well as supporting design-time
formal verification. In this paper, we present a methodology and a technical framework which support
modeling of evolving cyber-physical spaces and reasoning about their spatio-temporal properties. We
utilize a discrete, graph-based formalism for modeling cyber-physical spaces as well as primitives
of change, giving rise to a reactive system consisting of rewriting rules with both local and global
application conditions. Formal reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic-based specification
of properties and according model checking procedures, in both spatial and temporal fragments. We
evaluate our approach using a case study of a disaster scenario in a smart city.
Keywords: Cyber-Physical Spaces, Dependable Software-Intensive Systems, Safety and Reliability,
Modelling and Specification, Formal Verification

Summary
Computing and communication capabilities are increasingly embedded into physical spaces
thus blurring the boundary between computational and physical worlds; typically, this is the
case in modern cyber-physical systems, like smart buildings or smart cities, hereafter called
space-dependent systems. Conceptually, we consider such a composite environment as a
cyber-physical space (CPSp), which consists of interrelated computational and physical
entities. Like any other software-intensive system, a CPSp is not a static construct. Dynamic
actions (e.g. performed by agents) generate continuous change, leading to the notion of an
evolving cyber-physical space. Thus an evolving CPSp must face the manifold challenges of
dynamism – change may affect requirements of the overall space-dependent system.
Formally modeling space and its change as well as reasoning about various properties of
evolving space are crucial prerequisites for engineering dependable evolving CPSp. Our
approach targets the critical system requirements phase, where a way to obtain formal
assurances is highly sought. Elementary properties of an evolving spatial environment
can be roughly classified into three kinds; (i) spatial (local), referring to entities forming
1 Dipartimento

di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano. christos.tsigkanos@polimi.it
für Informatik, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. timo.kehrer@informatik.hu-berlin.de
3 Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano. carlo.ghezzi@polimi.it
2 Institut

cbe

2 Christos Tsigkanos et al.

some structural pattern, (ii) spatial (global), where entities are arbitrarily distributed in
space, as well as (iii) temporal, expressing system behavior. A plethora of approaches are
actively investigated by the community to support reasoning about properties of one of
these kinds; graphs and graph pattern matching provide suitable methods to deal with
local spatial properties, while model checking based on various forms of spatial and
temporal logics provides a rigorous approach for the verification of global spatial and
temporal properties. However, there is a lack of consideration of all of the above listed
kinds of properties at the same time. This is a significant deficiency concerning engineering
of dependable space-and-time-dependent systems, since properties of interest are often
complex spatio-temporal properties. Informally, a complex spatio-temporal property refers
to behavioral characteristics (temporal) of spatial relationships (spatial; global) of complex
structures (spatial; local).
Software engineering (SE) can have a profound impact in engineering of space-and-timedependent systems, by defining suitable modeling and specification notations as well as
supporting design-time formal verification. The typical SE approach –provide a suitable
model amenable for analysis and use it to validate a design– is applied to the domain of
CPSp. The main contribution of this paper is a technical framework for integrating several
fundamental techniques to support reasoning about complex spatio-temporal properties of a
model of evolving space. Our modeling approach grounds on Bigraphs [2], a fundamental
theory for structures in ubiquitous computing. Local reconfigurations are expressed as
rewriting rules called reaction rules, yielding a Bigraphical Reactive System (BRS).
Reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic-based specification of properties and
according model checking procedures. Locally bounded spatial properties are expressed as
bigraphical patterns, and bigraphical matching is used as a fundamental technique to locate
points in space where such formulae hold. For checking of non-local spatial properties,
we interpret a bigraphical model as a closure space [3], paving the way for adopting an
according spatial logic [4]. Concerning checking of temporal properties, state transition
models are obtained from a BRS. We restrict the combination of the above components
such that reasoning complexity is manageable and expressiveness is not compromised. We
demonstrate applicability using a disaster scenario in a smart city environment.

References
[1]

Christos Tsigkanos, Timo Kehrer, and Carlo Ghezzi. “Modeling and verification of
evolving cyber-physical spaces”. In: Proc. of the 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations
of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017. ACM, 2017, pp. 38–48.

[2]

Robin Milner. The Space and Motion of Communicating Agents. Cambridge University
Press, 2009.

[3]

Antony Galton. “A generalized topological view of motion in discrete space”. In:
Theoretical Computer Science 305.1 (2003), pp. 111–134.

[4]

Vincenzo Ciancia et al. “Specifying and verifying properties of space”. In: Theoretical
Computer Science. Springer, 2014, pp. 222–235.

