Herausgeber et al. (Hrsg.): Software Engineering und Software Management 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 1

Searching for Common Ground: Existing Literature on
Automotive Agile Software Product Lines

Philipp Hohl,1 Javad Ghofrani,2 Jürgen Münch,3 Michael Stupperich,4 Kurt Schneider5

This summary refers to the paper Searching for Common Ground: Existing Literature
on Automotive Agile Software Product Lines [Ho17]. This paper was published in the
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software and System Process (ICSSP 2017).
Keywords: software product line; agile software development; automotive domain

The need for creating digitally enhanced products, services, and experiences as well as the
emergence of new or modified business models has a significant impact on the automotive
domain. Innovative solutions and new topics such as Smart Mobility or Connectivity require
current automotive development processes to undergo major changes. They need to be
redesigned in a way that it is possible to learn and adapt continuously at a fast pace. Agile
methods are promising approaches to address these new challenges. However, agile methods
are not tailored to the specific characteristics of the automotive domain such as software
product line (SPLs) development. Although, there have been efforts to apply agile methods
in the automotive domain, widespread adoptions have not yet taken place.
We conducted a comprehensive literature study [Ho17] that gives an overview of agile
methods for embedded software development in the automotive domain, especially with
respect to SPLs. We limited the scope to automotive embedded software development.
Typical characteristics of the automotive domain that need to be considered are the deep
integration between hardware and software, a strong focus on development processes, a
close supplier involvement, and the importance of safety-critical functionality. Furthermore,
specific testing conditions like tests in real cars must be considered. The general research
question that guides the study is: What is the state-of-the-art to combine agile software
development and software product lines in the automotive domain, according to published
literature? This question is divided into three research sub-questions to provide different
views on the topic (see Fig. 1).
1 Daimler

AG, Wilhelm-Runge-Straße 11, 89013 Ulm, Germany, Philipp.Hohl@daimler.com
Universität Hannover, Welfengarten 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany, javad.ghofrani@inf.uni-hannover.de
3 University of Reutlingen, Danziger Str. 6, 71034 Böblingen, Germany, juergen.muench@reutlingen-university.de
4 Daimler AG, Wilhelm-Runge-Straße 11, 89013 Ulm, Germany, Michael.Stupperich@daimler.com
5 Leibniz Universität Hannover, Welfengarten 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany, kurt.schneider@inf.uni-hannover.de
2 Leibniz

cbe

2 Philipp Hohl, Javad Ghofrani, Jürgen Münch, Michael Stupperich, Kurt Schneider

Fig. 1: What is the state-of-the-art to combine agile software development and software product lines
in the automotive domain, according to published literature?

The literature review revealed that there is no specific approach tailored to the automotive
domain handling the combination of agile software development (ASD) and SPLs. A
possible explanation is that combining agile development with existing product lines is
challenging in the automotive domain (consider, for instance, the need for synchronization
with mechanical and electrical engineering). Searching for existing literature about the
introduction of agile methods in the context of automotive product line development was
also not fruitful. The study identified areas in the automotive domain where it seems to be
comparably easy to introduce agile development without product line development (e.g.,
entertainment software for the car). Searching for literature that deals with introducing
product line engineering to agile development in the automotive domain also did not reveal
significant results. However, looking at related domains provided many insights into how
the combination of agile methods and product line development could look alike in the
automotive domain.
The study identified challenges and possible solutions to combine ASD with SPL. Examples for such solutions are approaches for architecture evolution, lightweight variability
management, new communication structures and practices, lean and incremental safetyrelated procedures, and advanced synchronization mechanisms for hardware and software
development cycles. The insights from the study might help as starting points to modify
automotive software development processes so that they can benefit from both, agility and
systematic reuse through product lines.

References
[Ho17]

Hohl, P.; Ghofrani, J.; Münch, J.; Stupperich, M.; Schneider, K.: Searching for
common ground: Existing literature on automotive agile software product lines.
In (Bendraou, R.; Raffo, D.; LiGuo, H.; Maggi, F. M., eds.): Proceedings of the
2017 International Conference on Software and System Process - ICSSP 2017.
ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, pp. 70–79, 2017, isbn: 9781450352703.

