<Vorname Nachname [et. al.]>(Hrsg.): < Buchtitel>,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn <Jahr> 15

Modularity and architecture of PLC-based software for
automated production Systems: An analysis in industrial
companies
Birgit Vogel-Heuser 1, Juliane Fischer, Stefan Feldmann, Sebastian Ulewicz, Susanne
Rösch, Safa Bougouffa

Abstract: Adaptive and flexible production systems require modular and reusable software,
especially considering their long-term life cycle of up to 50 years. We introduce a benchmark
process – so-called SWMAT4aPS – to measure software maturity for industrial control software of
automated production systems.
Keywords: Automated Production Systems, Maturity, Modularity, Control Software

1

Introduction to SWMAT4aPS benchmark process

Automated production systems (aPS) are long living systems that are exposed to changes
over decades. Their complexity including automation hardware as well as system
functionality realized by software is increasing. The ability to adapt flexibly to changing
requirements by replacing or expanding cross-disciplinary modules, tracing of changes
and management of software variants and versions are a prerequisite for intelligent, selforganizing Industry 4.0-compliant aPS. To evaluate whether industrial control software
is qualified for Industry 4.0, the benchmark process SWMAT4aPS (Software Maturity
for aPS) was developed. SWMAT4aPS consists of two elements, a self-assessment
questionnaire and a detailed expert analysis for selected industrial companies. The core
of the approach consists of four steps, which are performed in an experimentation and
reporting phases. The first step is to conduct a survey with the developed questionnaire,
which contains 45 questions grouped into three maturity categories. Maturity in design,
maturity in test/quality assurance and maturity in start-up/operation/maintenance. In the
second step the questionnaires’ results of 16 German world-leading companies in
machine and plant manufacturing are analysed (cp. Fig 1). The third step is the expert
analysis in which four selected companies’ software architecture, code structure and the
workflow were analysed. We prove the validity of SWMAT4aPS by comparing the
results of the questionnaire with the results of the expert analysis. The best companies
reached overall maturity values of 0.86 %. We identified a huge variation of maturity
levels in most of the companies, some have high values in design, others in start-up and
operation. Refer to the full paper [VF17] for a complete discussion of results.
1

Institute of Automation and Information Systems, Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstr. 15, 85748
Garching near Munich, Germany, email: {vogel-heuser, juliane.fischer, stefan.feldmann, sebastian.ulewicz,
susanne.roesch,safa.bougouffa}@tum.de

16 Vorname1 Nachname1 und Vorname2 Nachname2

Fig. 1: Overview of maturity levels of companies 1 to 16 from first questionnaire showing the
huge variance in the individual company regarding the three different maturity values

To further elaborate the differences between the wide range of machine and plant
manufactures, to reveal modular dependency effects and to get deeper insight into the
use of software module a second questionnaire was conducted with more than 68
companies. Results of design level of the industrial control software regarding factors for
cross-disciplinary modularization are depicted (cp. Fig 2). The detailed analysis
confirmed that the SWMAT4aPS approach delivers valid results and gives a first
overview of the state of the art in software engineering in the respective company
compared to others of the same branch. In a third questionnaire with more than 70
companies we strengthened the aspects of electrical engineering and included technical
debt aspects and their reasons and impact.

Fig. 2: Maturity level design of control software of 68 companies in machine and plant
manufacturing from second questionnaire

2

References

[VF17]

Vogel-Heuser, Birgit; Fischer, Juliane; Feldmann, Stefan; Ulewicz, Sebastian; Rösch,
Susanne: Modularity and Architecture of PLC-based Software for Automated
Production Systems: An analysis in industrial companies. The Journal of Systems &
Software 2017, Elsevier, doi:10.101016/j.jss.2017.05.051.

