Herausgeber et al. (Hrsg.): SE/SWM 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 1

Neural Efficiency of Top-Down Program Comprehension

Norman Peitek,1 Janet Siegmund,2 Chris Parnin,3 Sven Apel,2 Johannes C. Hofmeister,2
Christian Kästner,4 Andrew Begel,5 Anja Bethmann,1 André Brechmann1

Abstract: We observed program comprehension with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and found a difference in neural efficiency between top-down and bottom-up comprehension, but
failed to find a significant effect from beacons. Furthermore, we were able to replicate the results of a
previous fMRI study, thereby strengthening the role of fMRI as measurement technique to observe
program comprehension and other related cognitive processes.
Keywords: functional magnetic resonance imaging; program comprehension; neural efficiency

Program comprehension is an important cognitive process, because programmers spend
most of their time understanding code [LVD06]. An efficient way to understand source
code is top-down comprehension, where beacons and plans guide programmers to the
relevant information [Br83]. When code lacks beacons and plans, or when programmers
lack the experience to recognize them, a slow and tedious statement-by-statement process is
necessary, which is called bottom-up comprehension [Pe87].
Understanding how programmers comprehend code is inherently difficult, because we
cannot directly observe internal cognitive processes. In cognitive neuroscience, functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is being used to better understand such elusive cognitive
processes. In our line of work, we use fMRI to infer neural processes involved in program
comprehension based on observed brain activation of programmers in order to evaluate the
often decades old models of program comprehension.
In our previous fMRI study on bottom-up comprehension, we found activation in brain
areas related to working memory, divided attention, problem solving, and language processing [Si14]. In this follow-up study, we adapted the previously used material to isolate
specific neural processes related to top-down comprehension [Si17].6
First, we could replicate the results of our first study on bottom-up comprehension. In
the original study, we found activation in Brodmann areas (BAs) 6, 21, 40, 44, and 47
1 Leibniz

Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany
of Passau, Passau, Germany
3 NC State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
4 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
5 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA
6 More information and material is available on the project’s Web site https://github.com/brains-oncode/paper-esec-fse-2017/.
2 University

cbe

2 Peitek et al.

within the brain’s left hemisphere, i.e. the speech hemisphere. We found part of these areas
again (i.e., BAs 21, 40, 44), indicating the suitability of fMRI for measuring program
comprehension. However, not all areas were significantly activated, which could be due to
individual anatomical differences between the participant groups or the reduced statistical
power of the current experiment.
Second, we found that top-down comprehension did not result in stronger activation than
bottom-up comprehension, which at first sight is in contrast to program-comprehension
models. However, we found a difference in the activation strength, such that the activation is
significantly lower for top-down comprehension than for bottom-up comprehension. Thus,
top-down comprehension has a higher neural efficiency than bottom-up comprehension.
Third, we could not find an effect of beacons on top-down comprehension, such that it
did not matter whether beacons were in the source code or not. Based on the participants’
comments and the data, we believe this effect is too small to be captured with the applied
study framework.
In a nutshell, our results indicate that fMRI is a useful approach to better understand the
cognitive processes of program comprehension. However, with this replication, we also
found potential weaknesses of the experimental design, which we are currently addressing.
Specifically, we are combining eye tracking with fMRI to help us map what participants are
seeing to what the brain is doing.

References
[Br83]

Brooks, Ruven: Towards a Theory of the Comprehension of Computer Programs. Int. J.
Man-Machine Studies, 18(6):543–554, 1983.

[LVD06] LaToza, Thomas D.; Venolia, Gina; DeLine, Robert: Maintaining Mental Models: A Study
of Developer Work Habits. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, pp. 492–501, 2006.
[Pe87]

Pennington, Nancy: Stimulus Structures and Mental Representations in Expert Comprehension of Computer Programs. Cognitive Psychologys, 19(3):295–341, 1987.

[Si14]

Siegmund, Janet; Kästner, Christian; Apel, Sven; Parnin, Chris; Bethmann, Anja; Leich,
Thomas; Saake, Gunter; Brechmann, André: Understanding Understanding Source Code
with Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, pp. 378–389, 2014.

[Si17]

Siegmund, Janet; Peitek, Norman; Parnin, Chris; Apel, Sven; Hofmeister, Johannes;
Kästner, Christian; Begel, Andrew; Bethmann, Anja; Brechmann, André: Measuring Neural
Efficiency of Program Comprehension. In: Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering. ESEC/FSE 2017, ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp.
140–150, 2017.

