(Hrsg.): Software Engineering,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 1

Should I Stay or Should I Go?
On Forces that Drive and Prevent MBSE Adoption in the Embedded Systems Industry

Andreas Vogelsang,1 Tiago Amorim,2 Florian Pudlitz,3 Peter Gersing,4 Jan Philipps5

Abstract: Accepted as full paper at the International Conference on Product-Focused Software
Process Improvement (PROFES’17).
Model-based Systems Engineering (MBSE) comprises a set of models and techniques that is often
suggested as solution to cope with the challenges of engineering complex systems. Although many
practitioners agree with the arguments on the potential benefits of the techniques, companies struggle
with the adoption of MBSE.
In this paper, we investigate the forces that prevent or impede the adoption of MBSE in companies
developing embedded systems. We contrast the hindering forces with issues and challenges that drive
these companies towards introducing MBSE.
Our results are based on 20 interviews with experts from 10 companies. Through exploratory research,
we analyze the results by means of thematic coding. Forces that prevent MBSE adoption mainly relate
to immature tooling, uncertainty about the return-on-investment, and fears on migrating existing data
and processes. On the other hand, MBSE adoption also has strong drivers and participants have high
expectations mainly with respect to managing complexity, adhering to new regulations, and reducing
costs.
We conclude that bad experiences and frustration about MBSE adoption originate from false or
too high expectations. Nevertheless, companies should not underestimate the necessary efforts for
convincing employees and addressing their anxiety.
Keywords: System engineering, model-based, process improvement, embedded systems, interview
study, empirical research

1 Technische

Universität Berlin, andreas.vogelsang@tu-berlin.de
Universität Berlin, buarquedeamorim@tu-berlin.de
3 Technische Universität Berlin, florian.pudlitz@tu-berlin.de
4 GPP Communication GmbH & Co. KG, Munich, Germany, p.gersing@gppag.de
5 foqee GmbH, Munich, Germany, philipps@foqee.de
2 Technische

cbe

Should I Stay or Should I Go?
On Forces that Drive and Prevent MBSE Adoption in the
Embedded Systems Industry
Andreas Vogelsang1 , Tiago Amorim1 , Florian Pudlitz1 , Peter Gersing2 , and
Jan Philipps3
1

arXiv:1709.00266v1 [cs.SE] 1 Sep 2017

Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
{andreas.vogelsang,buarquedeamorim,florian.pudlitz}@tu-berlin.de,
2
GPP Communication GmbH & Co. KG
Munich, Germany
p.gersing@gppag.de
3
foqee GmbH
Munich, Germany
philipps@foqee.de

Abstract. [Context] Model-based Systems Engineering (MBSE) comprises a set of models and techniques that is often suggested as solution
to cope with the challenges of engineering complex systems. Although
many practitioners agree with the arguments on the potential benefits of
the techniques, companies struggle with the adoption of MBSE. [Goal]
In this paper, we investigate the forces that prevent or impede the adoption of MBSE in companies that develop embedded software systems.
We contrast the hindering forces with issues and challenges that drive
these companies towards introducing MBSE. [Method] Our results are
based on 20 interviews with experts from 10 companies. Through exploratory research, we analyze the results by means of thematic coding.
[Results] Forces that prevent MBSE adoption mainly relate to immature
tooling, uncertainty about the return-on-investment, and fears on migrating existing data and processes. On the other hand, MBSE adoption
also has strong drivers and participants have high expectations mainly
with respect to managing complexity, adhering to new regulations, and
reducing costs. [Conclusions] We conclude that bad experiences and frustration about MBSE adoption originate from false or too high expectations. Nevertheless, companies should not underestimate the necessary
efforts for convincing employees and addressing their anxiety.

Keywords: System engineering, model-based, process improvement, embedded
systems, interview study, empirical research

1

Introduction

Model-based Systems Engineering (MBSE) describes the use of models and
model-based techniques to develop complex systems, which are mainly driven by

software [5]. MBSE tackles the complexity of those systems through an interrelated set of models, which connects development activities and provides comprehensive analyses. Many companies face problems with the increasing complexity
of software-intensive systems, their interdisciplinary development, and the huge
amount of mainly text-based specifications. MBSE offers a solution to managing
these problems and companies are attracted to its benefits.
Despite the envisioned MBSE benefits, companies are struggling with implementing it within the organization. Of course, organizational change is never
easy [7], however other methodologies, such as agile practices, have been adopted
much faster. So, what are the reasons and factors that prevent or impede companies from adopting MBSE?
In this paper, we investigate the forces that prevent or impede the adoption
of MBSE in companies that develop embedded systems. We contrast forces that
hinder its adoption with forces that drive companies towards introducing MBSE.
Our results are based on 20 interviews with experts from 10 organizations in
Germany. We analyze the results by means of thematic coding and categorize the
identified forces into inertia and anxiety forces, which prevent MBSE adoption, as
well as push and pull forces, which drive the companies towards MBSE adoption.
We frame the results with a coding of what the interviewees considered as MBSE.
Our paper makes the following contributions:
– We present a set of hindering and fostering forces on MBSE adoption in
industry. These results were extracted from interviews with 20 experts from
10 organizations located in Germany.
– We analyze these forces to differentiate between MBSE specific forces and
forces inherent to any kind of methodological change.
Forces that prevent MBSE adoption mainly relate to immature tooling, uncertainty about the return-on-investment, and fears on migrating existing data and
processes. On the other hand, MBSE adoption also has strong drivers and participants have high expectations mainly with respect to managing complexity,
adhering to new regulations, and detecting bugs earlier. We observed that the
hindering forces are much more concrete and MBSE-specific compared with the
fostering forces, which are oftentimes very generic (e.g., increase in product quality, managing complexity, supporting reuse). Oftentimes, the interviewees could
not even tell why or which part of MBSE contributes to the expected benefits.
From this, we conclude that bad experiences and frustration about MBSE
adoption originate from false or too high expectations. Nevertheless, companies
should not underestimate the necessary efforts for convincing employees and
addressing their anxiety.

2

Background and Related Work

Model-based Systems Engineering (MBSE) is a methodology to develop
systems with focus on models. Compared with traditional development, MBSE
supports engineers with automation capabilities (e.g., code generation, document derivation) and enhanced analysis capabilities (e.g., behavioral analysis,

performance analysis, simulation). INCOSE defines MBSE as the following [11]:
“MBSE is the formalized application of modeling to support system requirements,
design, analysis, verification and validation activities beginning in the conceptual
design phase and continuing throughout development and later life cycle phases.”
UML and SysML are standardized graphical modeling languages for MBSE
with capabilities to define different types of models, processes, procedures, and
operations. While UML is predominantly used for software development, SysML
encompasses also physical aspects of a system. The languages’ graphical models
are intended to cover all development phases of a system.
In some application domains, MBSE is widely used and is an integral part
of development [4]. Large tool vendors, such as IBM, Oracle, Microsoft, or the
Eclipse Foundation offer tooling solutions for MBSE.
Studies on MBSE Adoption. Bone and Cloutier [4] report on a survey conducted by the OMG, in which participants were asked about MBSE adoption
within their organization. Culture and general resistance to change was identified in the study as the largest inhibitor for MBSE adoption. The study found
that SysML is being used primarily for large-scale systems.
Motamedian [15] performed an applicability analysis for MBSE. Similar to
the results of Bone and Cloutier, she found that MBSE is widely used in specific
application areas. She reported that 50–80% of respondents who declared the use
of MBSE in real programs or projects work in defense and aircraft industries.
In contrast, over all responses, only 10% of participants claimed that they use
MBSE in their organization. The study identified lack of related knowledge and
skills as main barrier to MBSE introduction.
Mohagheghi et al. [14] collected data from four large companies that use
Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) in different projects. Their study summarizes
qualitative data from internal empirical studies, interviews, and a survey to investigate the state of the practice and adoption of MDE. All participants see
advantages in developing domain-specific solutions and modeling at different levels of abstraction. None of the companies mentioned shorter development time or
improved quality of code as main motivation. In addition, the integration with
other tools is problematic and mature tools for complex models are missing.
Higher degree of automation and reuse was considered the most important aspect to improve productivity in the long-term. Hutchinson et al. [10] describe
the practices of three commercial organizations as they adopted MBSE. Later,
they built a taxonomy of tool-related issues affecting the adoption of MBSE [24].
Kuhn et al. [12] focus on contextual forces and frictions of MBSE adoption
in large companies. They found that diffing in product lines, problem-specific
languages and types, live modeling, and traceability between artifacts are the
main drivers for adopting MBSE. Aranda et al. [1] focus more on developers
and infrastructure changes. They conclude that MBSE brings developers closer,
disrupts organizational structures, and achieves improvements in productivity.
Besides these studies on MBSE adoption, several case studies exist on applying model-based techniques to complex systems in different domains (e.g.,
railway [3], automotive [22], maritime traffic [21]).

Summary. Related studies report on successful applications of MBSE in several
cases but also mention challenges related to its adoption. MBSE techniques are
widely used in some industries, however, the majority of companies do not apply
MBSE. The goal of our study is to identify reasons and forces that prevent
companies from adopting MBSE and contrast them with the envisioned benefits
that drive the companies towards MBSE.

3

Study Approach

3.1

Research Questions

We structure our research by two research questions that focus on hindering and
fostering forces of MBSE adoption.
– RQ1: What are perceived forces that prevent MBSE adoption in industry?
• RQ1.1: What are habits and inertia that prevent MBSE adoption?
• RQ1.2: What are anxiety factors that prevent MBSE adoption?
– RQ2: What are perceived forces that foster MBSE adoption in industry?
• RQ2.1: What are perceived issues that push industry towards MBSE?
• RQ2.2: What MBSE benefits are perceived as most attractive?
3.2

Research Design

This is an exploratory research [20] based on semi-structured interviews. The
method provides insights into the examined topic and gives essential information to understand the phenomenon in its real context [8,18]. We developed
an interview guide [6] that was structured along a funnel model [18] starting
with general questions about the participant’s context and the understanding of
MBSE and afterwards going into detail about specific topics such as employee
training, MBSE integration, or experiences in the past.
3.3

Data Collection and Analysis

Study Participants. The interview participants were selected from personal
contacts of the authors and industrial partners that participate in a German
research project4 that has a focus on MBSE adoption in practice. The interviewee selection was based on two criteria: First, the interviewee should have a
work experience of several years. Second, the interviewee should work in an environment where MBSE adoption is a realistic option. In our case, we therefore
restricted the group of interviewees to people working on embedded systems or
in the context of embedded systems. It was not necessary that interviewees have
adopted MBSE in their context, however, 13 of the 20 interviewees stated that
they already have experiences in adopting MBSE. Table 1 provides an overview
of the participants and their context. The interviews were conducted by two of
the authors from May to December 2016.
4

https://spedit.in.tum.de/

Table 1. Study Participants
ID

Industry
Sector

Type of
Company

Role of
Participant

MBSE
Attitude

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
P12
P13
P14
P15
P16
P17
P18
P19
P20

Tool vendor
Tool vendor
R&D services
Automotive
Automotive
Medical
Medical
Automotive
Automotive
Automotive
Research
Avionics
Automotive
Avionics
Avionics
Avionics
Electronics
Avionics
Robotics
Automotive

OEM
Academic
SME
OEM
OEM
SME
SME
Supplier
OEM
OEM
Academic
Supplier
Supplier
OEM
Supplier
OEM
OEM
SME
OEM
OEM

Technical Sales
Professor
Manager
Head of Development
Systems Engineer
Head of SW Development
Head of QA
Function Architect
SW Architect
Function Architect
Professor
Technical Project Manager
Developer
SW Developer
SW Developer
Team Lead
Head of SW Development
Head of System Engineering
Team Lead
Research and Development

neutral
neutral
neutral
positive
neutral
positive
positive
negative
neutral
positive
negative
neutral
positive
neutral
negative
neutral
neutral
negative
positive
negative

Interviews. There were 20 fact-to-face interviews. Every interview took
around one hour. In consent with the interviewee, the interviewer took notes
for detailed analysis. All interview notes were managed using the qualitative
data analysis tool ATLAS.ti5 .
Analysis. Three researchers analyzed the interviews using qualitative coding [16]. Neither of them participated in the interview phase. The study was
framed using the framework of Forces on MBSE Adoption (see Section 4.2) with
the following codes: {Push, Pull, Inertia, Anxiety}. The analysis started with
all three researchers working on the same five interviews. The results were later
discussed and merged in a meeting. The discussions helped to homogenize the
understanding of the codes among the researchers [23] (i.e., what/how to look
for on each force). The remaining 15 interviews were tackled in a cross-analysis
fashion. The interviews were divided equally into three groups (A, B, C) and
each researcher coded the interview transcripts of two groups (i.e., AB, BC, or
AC) individually the same way as before. Then, each researcher merged the results and judged existing conflicts of the group he did not work on (a researcher
coding interviews of groups AB merged the results of interviews of group C).
In a round with all three researchers, the unresolved conflicts were ironed out.
Finally, the codes were divided into three groups {Pull, Inertia, (Anxiety, Push)}
5

http://atlasti.com

and each researcher worked on the quotations of codes of a group individually,
performing open coding to create second level codes. We present the results in
Section 4 by reporting the codes with the number of related quotations and the
number of interviews in which the code appeared. The number of quotations indicates the significance of a code over all interviews and the number of interviews
indicates the pervasiveness of the code within the interviews.
Availability of Data. Due to unreasonable effort necessary for anonymizing
the interview transcripts, we do not disclose them. However, we disclose the
interview guide and the codebook.6

4

Results

4.1

Overview and Definition of MBSE

As depicted in Table 1, we had a balanced set of participants with respect to
MBSE attitude. For 9 out of the 20 interviews, we coded a similar number of
fostering and hindering forces (i.e., neutral attitude). In 6 interviews, the fostering forces dominated (i.e., positive attitude) and in 5 interviews, the hindering
forces dominated (i.e., negative attitude). In the interviews, we did not refer to
any specific MBSE approach. We did this on purpose to identify forces independent from any concrete technique or tooling. Additionally, comparing the results
would have been much harder due to the large variety of MBSE approaches and
flavors. Nevertheless, we asked the interviewees to define MBSE. The result can
be seen in Fig. 1, where a word cloud representation of terms mentioned more
than 2 times is depicted.

Fig. 1. Word cloud of MBSE descriptions

The word cloud shows the close association of MBSE with graphical models.
Especially graphical descriptions of architectures and processes were mentioned
6

https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.5368453

several times. However, some interviewees mentioned that “graphical representation is only a part of MBSE, not everything” (P12) and others pointed out that
MBSE should not be deformed to graphical programming. The only reference to a
specific instance of MBSE in the word cloud is given by Simulink. Simulink7 is a
widely used tool in the embedded systems domain for modeling, simulating, and
analyzing dynamic systems. Interestingly, the interviewees mentioned that using
Simulink is not considered as doing MBSE (e.g., P4:“Pure implementation with
Simulink is graphical programming, not MBSE.”, P16:“Simulink is model-based
engineering but not model-based systems engineering”). UML/SysML, which we
expected to appear more often in the characterization of MBSE, was only mentioned rarely, however, notation was mentioned several times. The term information model was used a few times as important part of an MBSE approach.
P7: “A core topic of MBSE is the information model that specifies and relates all
development artifacts.” Apart from that, the interviewees frequently mentioned
several well-known properties related to MBSE such as abstraction, formalization, and comprehension. In summary, the results show that our interviewees
were not biased by a specific MBSE flavor or approach that they previously
had in mind when answering our questions. However, the variety of answers also
shows that the term MBSE is still far away from common understanding.
4.2

Forces on MBSE Adoption

Inspired by the categorization of Hohl et al. [9], we defined a quadrant-wise
framework for categories of forces on MBSE adoption (see Fig. 2). The catego-

Triggers
Hindering Fostering

Forces

Current Situation Envisioned Solution

Push

Pull

Inertia

Anxiety

Fig. 2. MBSE adoption forces diagram

rization aims to better understand the different aspects of the transition process
from traditional to MBSE practices. We designed the framework to identify
Forces that work towards Hindering or Fostering the adoption of MBSE and
their origin. These forces have different origins or Triggers and are classified
7

https://de.mathworks.com/products/simulink.html

either into shortcomings of the Current Situation or expected benefits of the
Envisioned Solution (MBSE in our case). We distinguish between Push and Pull
as forces that foster MBSE adoption. The former is triggered by issues or demands that the current situation cannot address, the latter is triggered by the
“to-be harvested” benefits of the new solution. In contrast, we define Inertia and
Anxiety as forces that hinder MBSE adoption. The former is triggered by the
feeling that the current solution is “good enough” and habits that keep people
from trying out something new. The latter is triggered by fears that MBSE introduction will not pay-off, mainly caused by uncertainties and perception flaws.
According to Hohl et al. [9], this classification is inspired by the Customer Forces
Diagram by Maurya8 that itself is inspired by the Forces Diagram by Moesta and
Spiek from the Jobs-to-be-done framework9 . All four forces are present within
an organization at the same time.

Fig. 3. Number of quotations related to MBSE adoption forces

In total, we coded 242 quotations. Their distribution between the forces can
be seen in Fig. 3. The fostering (131 times) and hindering (111) forces were mentioned to a similar amount. Quotations categorized as pull (94) are almost triple
of push (37). Comparing both (pull and push), 72% of the fostering quotations
were driven by the benefits of MBSE, while problems in their in-house processes
represented 28%. This can be compared to the number of quotations on inertia
(51). Pull forces were coded most, representing 39% of all quotations. To analyze
the general attitude of a participant towards MBSE adoption, we divided the
number of coded quotations related to fostering forces (push and pull) by the
total number of quotations coded for that participant. We considered a participant to have a positive attitude when the ratio of fostering forces was higher
than 60%, a neutral attitude for ratios between 60% and 40%, and a negative
attitude for a ratio smaller than 40%. This can be seen in Table 1. The results of
8
9

https://leanstack.com/science-of-how-customers-buy/
http://jobstobedone.org

the last step of the coding process generated similar codes in different categories
(e.g., Tooling Shortcomings from Anxiety category and Immature tooling or Incompatibility with existing tools, both from Inertia category). Although similar
names, these codes encompasses disjoint characteristics and their coexistence
serves a purpose. All codes created during the analysis can be seen in Fig. 4.

Anxiety (60)

Pull (94)

Support of reuse (3)
Better overview through abstraction (4)
Code generation (4)

Team competence loss (3)
Migration issues (6)

Positive experiences (4)

Role misunderstandings (8)

Cost reduction (6)

Large training efforts (10)

Efficient certification (8)

Methodology shortcomings (11)

Increase in product quality (10)

Tooling shortcomings (12)

Documentation support (10)

Skills of employees (19)

Early feedback on correctness (15)
Easier handling of complexity (19)

ROI uncertainty (19)

Traditional

MBSE
Growing complexity (11)

Doubts about improvements (11)
Immature tooling (9)
Incompatibility with existing tools (7)
Changing way of thinking (7)
Insufficient training (6)
Bad experiences (6)
Learning new tools (5)
Immature methodologies (4)
Migration is needed (4)
Development process does not fit (3)
Missing excitement (3)
No support (2)

Quality issues (6)
Time pressure (4)
Demand by internal actors (4)
Comply with regulation (3)
Modularization (3)
Inefficient testing (2)
Market pressure (1)

Lack of traceability (1)
Inertia (51)

Push (37)

Fig. 4. Overview of MBSE adoption forces

In the following, the preventing forces found in the study are subsequently
described and explained using the information from the interview transcripts
and the interpretations from coding and analysis.
4.3

Hindering Force: Inertia

With 51 distinct quotations, inertia forces were mentioned fewer times compared
with forces related to anxiety (60 quotations). We structured the inertia related
quotations with respect to four inertia topics.
Tooling Inertia (21 coded quotations from 15 interviews) With 21 quotations, tooling inertia was the most frequently mentioned inertia force. Tooling
inertia describes phenomena of the current in-house tooling environment that
made our participants refrain from adopting MBSE. Tooling inertia includes resistance against learning new tools as well as potential incompatibilities of MBSE
tools with current tools. “People preferred using Excel instead of the new MBSE
tool” (P8), “Especially elderly employees who are used to textual specifications

have difficulties with drawing tools” (P15), “It’s not possible to connect/trace
the models with artifacts in other tools.” (P5)
Apart from the resistance of learning and integrating new tools, our participants reported on resistance of employees if MBSE tools are immature. Especially
tools with bad user experience, low stability, and missing basic features are a
major factor why employees resist MBSE adoption. “Tool is not user friendly.
Things are distributed over several menus; you have to look for everything.”
(P5), “We are working in teams. That’s why we need a tool with fine-grained
access rights and control.” (P10)
We classified immature tooling as inertia force because the expectation that
tools are missing important features makes the current situation look not so
bad. Tooling issues were also mentioned in the context of anxiety. In that cases,
interviewees feared that the available tools cannot fulfill the promises of MBSE.
Context Inertia (18 quotations, 13 interviews) A second inertia force
mentioned quite often was context inertia, which describes people refraining
from MBSE adoption because they believe it does not fit their current business
situation. The most mentioned in this category was doubts about whether MBSE
would really improve the current situation. “It needs a huge emergency to justify
the costs of introducing an MBSE tool.” (P7), “Currently, problems are not so
urgent yet. Therefore, there is not much willingness to act.” (P20) Another
aspect of the context that make people refrain from MBSE adoption is the
potential need to migrate old data or legacy systems or when it seems that the
current development process does not fit MBSE techniques. “Legacy problems
are a huge hurdle because, in general, the old way of working must further be
maintained and supported.” (P20), “MBSE adoption would have caused changes
in our development process. Therefore, we didn’t do it.” (P2)
Personal Inertia (16 quotations, 9 interviews) Personal inertia captures
forces related to an individual’s personality and experiences that hold him/her
back from adopting MBSE. In our study, these forces were led by the resistance
against learning a new way of thinking. “MBSE is not just about changing
the notation; it’s about changing the way of how I think about systems” (P2),
“Abstractions in MBSE are not easy to comprehend.” (P12) Similarly, if people
had bad experiences with MBSE or related techniques, they have a personal
reluctance against adopting MBSE in their current situation.
Maturity Inertia (12 quotations, 8 interviews) Maturity inertia was least
mentioned in our interviews. Participants were critical about a potential MBSE
adoption if they had the impression that the MBSE methodology is not mature
enough, there has not been sufficient training before, and there is no support by
experts. “We first need a common terminology between employees of different
departments” (P7), “The support for debugging problems is very limited” (P9)
4.4

Hindering Force: Anxiety

Anxiety is a force related to expectations and fears that make MBSE adoption
less appealing. These expectations originate from uncertainties that are still to

be clarified or a false perception of reality. We structured the anxiety related
quotations into the following topics:
ROI Uncertainty (19 quotations, 12 interviews) Return on investment
(ROI) is the benefit resulting from an investment. Introducing MBSE will incur cost spread in several factors such as training, tooling, migration, or lower
productivity. Many interviewees were concerned that the investments on introducing MBSE will not pay off. “[It will costs us] A large sum in the million
range” (P7), “Coaching on the job is very important, but it costs a lot” (P2)
Skills of Employees (19 quotations, 11 interviews) Some interviewees fear
that (some of) the employees in their company may lack the necessary skills to
efficiently adopt MBSE. This can negatively influence the introduction of MBSE
in two different ways: Either those employees do not adopt MBSE or they apply
them incorrectly. “Mechanical engineers know CAD modeling but don’t know
modeling of behavior” (P1), “Modeling should not be an end in itself” (P16)
Tooling Shortcomings (12 quotations, 8 interviews) The interviewees
perceived problems with tooling as a reason for not introducing MBSE. The
interviewees fear that current tool solutions do not address a significant part
of the development process and the envisioned benefits of MBSE. Thus, extra
work would be necessary to fill the gaps (e.g., migration of data between MBSE
tools and current tools). “Everything in one tool? Nobody wants that” (P5),
“Performance of the tools [is a challenge for introducing MBSE]” (P7)
Methodology Shortcomings (11 quotations, 6 interviews) Many interviewees emphasized the lack of maturity on the current MBSE methodology.
This category can be interpreted in two ways. Either the methodology really is
incomplete or the knowledge of practitioners is immature. In addition, concerns
about the lack of tailored approaches for MBSE introduction were pointed out.
“A consistent methodology is lacking, resulting in uncertainties” (P1), “There
are no process models that integrate MBSE properly.” (P11)
Large Training Efforts (10 quotations, 5 interviews) This category groups
perceived potential problems related to training the team on using MBSE and
its respective tools. Some of the codes were related to the costs of training and
had intersections with ROI uncertainty. Other codes were related to the fear of
unsuccessful training. “Training is necessary: How do I bring my employees to
the same level as the experts?” (P7), “Employees will not accept MBSE if no
training is provided before.” (P7)
Besides these major categories, interviewees also mentioned potential team
competence loss (3 quotations, 3 interviews) and new responsibilities in the team
that could cause role misunderstandings (8 quotations, 5 interviews). The interviewees perceived migration issues (6 quotations, 6 interviews) of projects that
started with traditional development method to MBSE.
4.5

Fostering Force: Push

With 37 distinct quotations, push was the force with the smallest number of
quotations. We structured push forces within three categories:

Product Push (20 quotations, 10 interviews) We grouped here codes
related to product-oriented push forces. Growing complexity (11 quotations /
8 interviews) of the software was the code with most quotations within the
push forces. As systems become more software-intensive, tackling the growing
complexity is currently a real challenge, thus, organizations feel the need to
shift to better solutions. “Increasing complexity of products [pushes us towards
MBSE]” (P1), “Complex software, especially with concurrency [pushes us towards MBSE]” (P3) Further codes were quality issues (6/3) within the product
or its specification and the need for modularization (3/3) in order to make certification and reuse more efficient.
Stakeholder Enforcement (8 quotations, 4 interviews) Some interviewees
mentioned that they are forced or at least pushed towards MBSE by recommendations or requests from stakeholders. Demands by internal actors (4/3) such
as developers or management push companies towards MBSE adoption as well
as legal requirements to comply with regulations (3/1). Market pressure (1) was
mentioned with respect to issues with acquiring talented employees: “We have
to be modern, otherwise we will not get good people anymore” (P2)
Process Push (7 quotations, 4 interviews) Deficiencies of the current process were only mentioned a few times as forces that push companies towards
MBSE. The codes were time pressure (4/3), inefficient testing (2/2), and lack of
traceability (1). “We have no idea what happens when something changes” (P5),
“[We have] Large amounts of requirements; how can the tester handle this?” (P5)
In summary, interviewees provided more push forces related to issues with
the product instead of issues with the process.
4.6

Fostering Force: Pull

We identified several factors of envisioned benefits that drive companies towards
MBSE adoption. A majority of the responses given by the interviewees is related
to envisioned improvements of the development process. This is interesting since
process issues were only mentioned a few times as push factors.
Easier Handling of Complexity (19 quotations, 12 interviews) With
each new function to integrate, the complexity of software increases. Managing
the different software components gets more and more complicated. The interviewees see great opportunities in MBSE to support this challenge. Due to a
large number of possible variants of products, complexity of software increases
in many companies. “[MBSE will help us to] understand highly complex issues or
illustrate something” (P15), “[MBSE will support the] management of product
line and variability” (P1)
Early Feedback on Correctness (15 quotations, 10 interviews) The desire for early feedback and front-loading was also a strong pull factor. Especially
early verification on higher levels of development were mentioned to improve the
development process and finally also the product. “Early verification and simulation saves time in the end” (P7), “[MBSE will provide] better quality due to
early fault detection” (P4), “[MBSE will] Enable automatic verification” (P6)

Documentation Support (10 quotations, 7 interviews) The interviewees
expect support to create and manage documentation. The increasing complexity of software development has complicated the management of requirement
documents. “[MBSE will provide] better documentation” (P13), “[MBSE will]
generate documentation and code” (P12)
Increase in Product Quality (10 quotations, 5 interviews) The interviewees expect better products by introducing MBSE. This includes the final
product as well as intermediate development artifacts. “[MBSE will] improve
the quality of requirement documents” (P10)
Efficient Certification (8 quotations, 5 interviews) Some interviewees envision that MBSE will make it easier to certify software-intensive products. Some
interviewees specifically mentioned that MBSE would enable a modular certification, where only parts of the product are certified and not the entire product.
“[MBSE is] necessary to comply with regulatory requirements” (P6), “[MBSE
will enable] modular certification and parallel development” (P6)
Additional, less frequently mentioned, pull factors include cost reduction (6
coded quotations), positive experiences (4), code generation (4), better overview
through abstraction (4), and support of reuse (3).

5

Discussion

The results show that people from industry have high hopes and expectations for
MBSE. However, there are also several hurdles that need to be addressed when
adopting MBSE, some of which are very generic. These problems are sometimes
even part of the human nature and its natural resistance to change in general.
Relation to Existing Evidence. When comparing our results to related studies on forces of adopting development methodologies in industry, we can identify
some general patterns. Hohl et al. [9] report on forces that prevent the adoption of agile development in the automotive domain. They also report on forces
of inertia and anxiety resisting a necessary change of mind-set, or limited acceptance for organizational restructuring. Additionally, the current development
process was perceived as good-enough. The same forces also appeared in our
study. Riungu-Kalliosaari et al. [17] performed a case study on the adoption
of DevOps in industry, where they identified five high-level adoption challenges.
Three of these challenges were also mentioned as inertia or anxiety factors in our
study, namely deep-seated company culture, industry constraints and feasibility,
and unclear methodology. Parallels can also be found in the work of Bauer and
Vetrò [2] with respect to the adoption of structured reuse approaches in industry.
Similarly, we also found common and generic goals (i.e., pull forces) that are
in the focus of many process improvement activities. Schmitt and Diebold [19]
have analyzed common improvement goals that are usually considered when improving the development process. The pull factors that we extracted in our study
are part of the main goals elicited by them (e.g., quality and time-to-market).
When focusing on the forces specific to MBSE that did not appear (so
strongly) in the related studies, some factors remain. Incompatibility of MBSE

tools with existing tools is a specific inertia force that prevent MBSE adoption.
A second force of inertia that was specifically reported for MBSE adoption is
the need to adopt a new way of thinking, especially with respect to abstractions.
The anxiety forces that we identified were rather generic such that we did not
identify any MBSE specific anxiety forces. Interestingly, loss of competences or
loss of power, which is a typical anxiety factor, was not mentioned very often.
Impact for Industry. MBSE streamlines the activities in all phases of the software lifecycle. It replaces document-based systems engineering and automates
several tasks (e.g., code generation). An organization doing the transition from
document-based to model-based will require changes in all software development
stages, including tools, processes, artifacts, and developing paradigms.
Our interviewees focused more on push forces related to the product and not
so much on the process. One might infer that engineers recognize the growing
complexity of their products but they cannot link it to the shortcomings of the
current processes. Perhaps, inside their mind, the processes are OK since it has
been functioning properly until now and the problem is the product that is
getting more difficult to develop.
The results support decision-making and are an initial step towards efficiently
introducing MBSE in companies. Implementing change is always a hassle, therefore companies should manage expectations by setting concrete improvement
goals, relating them to concrete MBSE techniques, and making changes step-bystep. Many interviewees mentioned that MBSE adoption should best be piloted
in small projects with a clear scope.
Impact for Academia. MBSE complexity raises uncertainties towards effort
and success of its introduction. These uncertainties can be mitigated by knowledge building. Misunderstandings of MBSE, its tools, and processes were quoted
many times, which means research is not properly reaching practitioners. This
problem is not limited to the MBSE domain but to research in general. With a
clear idea of the forces fostering and hindering MBSE introduction, the next step
is to understand how to manage those factors, mitigating them when necessary,
or strengthen the ones that contribute to successful MBSE introduction. The
results provide promising research directions based on real industry needs.
5.1

Threats to Validity

The validity of our results is subject to the following threats:
Subject selection bias. Since this is an exploratory study, we selected a convenience sample of project partners and personal contacts as study subjects.
Although we selected participants from a broad spectrum of companies and
industrial domains, the results may be influenced by the fact that all study participants work in Germany. Additionally, the interviewees were selected from an
environment where MBSE adoption is a realistic option.
Researcher bias. Our study was carried out in the context of a project on
transferring MBSE into practice, which means that the authors have a positive
attitude towards MBSE in general. Additionally, some of the interviewees are also
partners in this project, however, we also interviewed people from companies not

involved in the project. To reduce researcher bias, the interviews were conducted
by two researchers who took notes independently.
Research method. Validity is threatened by the possibility of misunderstandings between interviewees and the researchers. To minimize this risk, the study
goal was explained to the participants prior to the interview. Steps taken to
improve the reliability of the interview guide included a review and a pilot test.
We followed several strategies proposed by Maxwell [13] to mitigate threats.
The interviews were conducted as part of a larger project, where we established
a long-term involvement of the study subjects. As part of this, we presented
our study in the context of the project, where the results were reviewed by the
project partners. We substantiate our assertions by providing quasi-statistics on
the frequency of codes occurrences in the interview data. To validate our results,
we compared them with existing studies on development methodology adoption.
External validity. We expect that our results are representative for the German
embedded systems industry, however, we cannot generalize the results to other
countries or other types of systems engineering.

6

Conclusions

Organizational change is never easy, especially when trying to introduce complex
approaches such as MBSE. In this research, we look for the reasons and factors
that prevent or impede companies from adopting MBSE. For this means, we
created a forces framework that we used to analyze the information from the
verbatim of 20 interviews. We identified forces that hinder and foster MBSE
adoption in organizations. We coded the interviews within several discussion
rounds. Based on our results, practitioners may challenge their decision processes
and adoption strategies. Researchers may study our results and find evidence
to quantify and detail the considerations of practitioners. We conclude that
bad experiences and frustration about MBSE adoption originate from false or
too high expectations. Nevertheless, companies should not underestimate the
necessary efforts for convincing employees and addressing their anxiety.
As future work, we plan to analyze the data to investigate correlations between roles and identified categories as well as dependencies between the forces.
Additionally, the research community may create mechanisms to identify the
forces within the organization in a more effective and systematic way, analyze
how hindering forces can be mitigated, understand how to harvest forces synergy,
and figure out which tools and techniques have the highest ROI.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF), grant “SPEDiT, 01IS15058”.

References
1. Aranda, J., Damian, D., Borici, A.: Transition to model-driven engineering. In:
MODELS (2012)

2. Bauer, V., Vetrò, A.: Comparing reuse practices in two large software-producing
companies. Journal of Systems and Software 117 (2016)
3. Böhm, W., Junker, M., Vogelsang, A., Teufl, S., Pinger, R., Rahn, K.: A formal systems engineering approach in practice: An experience report. In: SER&IPs (2014)
4. Bone, M., Cloutier, R.: The current state of model based systems engineering:
Results from the OMG SysML request for information 2009. In: CSER (2010)
5. Broy, M., Damm, W., Henkler, S., Pohl, K., Vogelsang, A., Weyer, T.: Introduction to the SPES modeling framework. In: Model-Based Engineering of Embedded
Systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2012)
6. Bryman, A.: Social research methods. Oxford university press (2015)
7. Conner, D.R.: Managing at the Speed of Change. Random House (1993)
8. Dresch, A., Lacerda, D.P., Antunes, J.A.V.: Design Science Research. Springer
International Publishing (2015)
9. Hohl, P., Münch, J., Schneider, K., Stupperich, M.: Forces that prevent agile adoption in the automotive domain. In: PROFES (2016)
10. Hutchinson, J., Rouncefield, M., Whittle, J.: Model-driven engineering practices
in industry. In: ICSE (2011)
11. INCOSE: Systems engineering vision 2020 (2007)
12. Kuhn, A., Murphy, G.C., Thompson, C.A.: An exploratory study of forces and
frictions affecting large-scale model-driven development. In: MODELS (2012)
13. Maxwell, J.A.: Qualitative research design: An interactive approach, vol. 41. Sage
publications (2012)
14. Mohagheghi, P., Gilani, W., Stefanescu, A., Fernandez, M.A.: An empirical study
of the state of the practice and acceptance of model-driven engineering in four
industrial cases. Empirical Software Engineering 18(1) (2013)
15. Motamedian, B.: MBSE applicability analysis. International Journal of Scientific
and Engineering Research (2013)
16. Neuman, W.: Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.
Alpha Books, 7 edn. (2010)
17. Riungu-Kalliosaari, L., Mäkinen, S., Lwakatare, L.E., Tiihonen, J., Männistö, T.:
DevOps adoption benefits and challenges in practice: A case study. In: PROFES
(2016)
18. Runeson, P., Höst, M.: Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research
in software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 14(2) (2008)
19. Schmitt, A., Diebold, P.: Why do we do software process improvement? In: PROFES (2016)
20. Shields, P., Rangarjan, N.: A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and Project Management. New Forums, Stillwater, OK (2013)
21. Vogelsang, A., Eder, S., Hackenberg, G., Junker, M., Teufl, S.: Supporting concurrent development of requirements and architecture: A model-based approach. In:
MODELSWARD (2014)
22. Vogelsang, A., Femmer, H., Winkler, C.: Systematic elicitation of mode models for
multifunctional systems. In: REFSQ (2015)
23. Weston, C., Gandell, T., Beauchamp, J., McAlpine, L., Wiseman, C., Beauchamp,
C.: Analyzing interview data: The development and evolution of a coding system.
Qualitative Sociology 24(3) (2001)
24. Whittle, J., Hutchinson, J., Rouncefield, M., Burden, H., Heldal, R.: A taxonomy
of tool-related issues affecting the adoption of model-driven engineering. Software
and System Modeling 16(2) (2017)

